---
layout: post
title: "Alpine JS v3"
categories: orignal
author: "Conrad Maaijen"
---

Alpine version 3.0 will be coming soon! There is going to be an [Alpine Day](https://alpineday.com/) online event where the creator, [Caleb Porzio](https://twitter.com/calebporzio), will be talking about some new things coming to [Alpine](https://github.com/alpinejs/alpine) as well as pushing the new version live!

In this quick post, you can learn about some of the new features and how you can stay up-to-date about the latest version and the new release.

<!--more-->

## New features

### Global Alpine Components

Have you ever created an Alpine component, and you re-used the functionality inside of the x-data attribute? If so, you would need to include a globally accessible function like so:

```html
<div x-data="alpineDropdown()">
...
</div>

<script>
    window.function = alpineDropdown(){
        ...
    }
</script>
```

With Global Alpine Components, you can use Alpine.component() to encapsulate this functionality.

```html
<div x-data="dropdown">
...
</div>

<script>
    Alpine.component('dropdown', () => ({
        open: false,
        toggle() { this.open = !this.open }
    }))
```

I'm not 100% sure what the most important difference is. Maybe better organization? Whatever it is, I'm sure Caleb has some genius idea behind the underlying functionality.

### Nested Components

Currently, in [Alpine v2](https://github.com/alpinejs/alpine), if you nested a component inside another component, you would not be able to access the parent component easily. Now, in version 3 it's going to be a piece of cake:

```html
<div x-data="{ firstName: "John" }">
    <div x-data="{ lastName: "Doe" }">
        <span x-text="firstName + ' ' + lastName"></span>
    </div>
</div>
```

### Better x-init And $el

In the current version of AlpineJS, the `x-init` could only be added to the parent element, but now you can add that to any element inside the component.

```js
<div x-data="{ name: "John Doe" }">
    <span x-init="name = $el.textContent">Jane Doe</span>
</div>
```

Also, the `$el` magic property used to only return the component's root element; however, now it will return the node element it is referenced on.

## More to come

There are so many more features that are coming to v3, including APIs and plugins. Well, that's what the email says anyway.

Alpine Day is going to be a free online event with a handful of 18-minute talks from the community. Make sure to signup at [https://alpineday.com](https://alpineday.com) and you'll be notified when this awesome online event is going to be available.

This day is going to be jam-packed with some rad stuff, and the creator will be over-hauling Alpine with the following:

* New Codebase
* New Docs
* New Site
* New Branding
* New Features
* New Plugins
* Whew.

Make sure to signup for [this event](https://alpineday.com) to learn more.

## Upgrading to Version 3

As if Alpine couldn't get any more rad, it seems that this upgrade will prioritize backward compatibility, which means it will be super easy to upgrade.
