---
layout: post
title: "Oh my zsh"
categories: original
author: "Conrad Maaijen"
---
I spend a lot of my day in the terminal, and my shell of choice is Zsh — a highly customizable Unix shell that packs some very powerful features. I’m always looking for ways to type less and to automate all the things. Luckily this is something that Zsh lends itself well to.

In this post, you will find commands, plugins, aliases and tools that will save you some keystrokes and make you more productive in your day-to-day work.

<!--more-->

If you don’t have Zsh installed on your machine, then [check out this post](https://github.com/ohmyzsh/ohmyzsh/wiki/Installing-ZSH) to get it up and running.

### Things Zsh Can Do out of the Box

Zsh shares a lot of handy features with Bash. None of the following are unique to Zsh, but they’re good to know nonetheless. I encourage you to start using the command line to perform operations such as those listed below. It might seem like more work than using a GUI at first, but once you get the hang of things, you’ll never look back.

* Entering `cd` from anywhere on the file system will bring you straight back to your home directory.
* Entering `!!` will bring up the last command. This is handy if a command fails because it needs admin rights. In this case you can type `sudo !!`.
* You can use `&&` to chain multiple commands. For example, `mkdir project && cd project && npm init -y`.
* Conditional execution is possible using `||`. For example, `git commit -m "whatever..." || echo "Commit failed"`.
* Using a `-p` switch with the `mkdir` command will allow you to create parent directories as needed. Using brace expansion reduces repetition. For example, `mkdir -p articles/jim/sitepoint/article{1,2,3}`.
* Set environment variables on a per-command basis like so: `NODE_DEBUG=myapp node index.js`. Or, on a per-session basis like so: `export NODE_DEBUG=myapp`. You can check it was set by typing `echo $<variable-name>`.
* Pipe the output of one command into a second command. For example, `cat /var/log/kern.log | less` to make a long log readable, or `history | grep ssh` to search for any history entries containing “ssh”.
* You can open files in your editor from the terminal. For example, `nano ~/.zshrc` (nano), `subl ~/.zshrc` (Sublime Text), `code ~/.zshrc` (VS Code). If the file doesn’t exist, it will be created when you press Save in the editor.
* Navigation is an important skill to master. Don’t just rely on your arrow keys. For example, `Ctrl + a` will take you to the beginning of a line.
* Whereas `Ctrl + e` will take you to the end.
* You can use `Ctrl + w` to delete one word (backw­ards).
* `Ctrl + u` will remove everything from the cursor to the beginning of the line.
* `Ctrl + k` will clear everything from the cursor to the end of the line. These last three can be undone with `Ctrl + y`.
* You can copy text with `Ctrl + Shift + c`. This is much more elegant than right clicking and selecting *Copy*.
* Conversely, you can paste copied text with `Ctrl + shift + v`.

Try to commit those key combos to memory. You’ll be surprised at how often they come in handy.
